Farnam Street

Mastering the best of what other people have already figured out

There are as many investment strategies as there are investment opportunities. Some are good; many are terrible. Here’s the one that I lean on the most when I’m looking for low risk and above average returns.

***

“The whole secret of investment is to find places where it’s safe and wise to non-diversify. It’s just that simple.”

Goal: An investment algorithm to lean on hard when it is available. Low-risk, long-duration, above-average returns.

There are many paths to investment heaven (and we’vewritten on the topic before). The diversity of working approaches demonstrates that. However, fundamentally, any useful approach must do three things:

I believe the system below satisfies the first criterion, and allows for all three.



Everyone WinsSuccessful businesses have indefinitely sustainable business systems: owners, employees, customers, suppliers, all content.

Ballast for the StormLook for a sustainable balance sheet, given the capricious nature of the world. Past bad events do not predict future bad events. Sometimesinefficient balance sheetsallow companies to survive by positioning them for all environments, not just optimizing for one.

Different and Hard to MatchCandidates must occupy a structurally profitable, indefinitely sustainable business niche, allowing for the truism that all moats are subject to being crossed eventually. There must be an element of mystery.

Operational SoundnessReliable execution of the “blocking and tackling” of operations is a must. Getting this wrong always costs big, and can ruin a good niche.

A Few Simple VariablesAllowing for the difficulty of predicting the future, candidates should have just a few reasonably predictable economic variables that will dominate their outcomes. In the words of Warren Buffett, “There are all kinds of businesses where we have no idea what they’ll earn this year, let alone any future year.” Look for boring investments, sexy is usually complicated and full of competition. Look forwhat’s staying the same.

Long RunwayYou should be able to foresee an indefinite period of growth ahead, through some combination of market creation, market penetration, and pricing power.

Priced AttractivelyStock should be priced so that stock returns >= business returns, always including amargin for errorin forward-looking estimates.

Seemingly missing is the concept of “good management,” but I consider this redundant in light of the first four elements. Any business meeting those criteria is being managed properly, and any investment going 7/7 has a very low probability of failure.

Notice that the word indefinite is used several times. This does not mean the same thing as infinite. There are no infinities in the business world. Indefinite means “as far out as can presently be seen.”

Caution: what psychologists call the “representativeness heuristic” puts us at risk of over-fitting to this or any algorithm. Always be on guard. In the words ofRichard Feynman, “Never fool yourself, and remember that you are the easiest person to fool.”

Read Next

Discover What You’re Missing



As seen on:

© 2025 Farnam Street Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.Proudly powered byWordPress. Hosted byPressable. See ourPrivacy Policy.

We’reSyrus Partners.We buy amazing businesses.

Farnam Street participates in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising commissions by linking to Amazon.