Farnam Street

Mastering the best of what other people have already figured out

The most powerful skill we’re never taught is deciding what to ignore.

Someone who can concentrate on what truly matters will achieve more than someone who can’t.

When everything seems equally important, we waste precious time on things that don’t advance us toward our goals. You can spend your energy on what’s important or what’s not – but trying to do both only undermines only what’s important.

Learning what to ignore is the key to focusing on what matters. This sounds simpler than it is.

Consider Albert Einstein. Many believe his genius lay in his mathematical ability. But while he was certainly talented, those who knew him considered his mathematical skills relatively ordinary.

So how did someone with average mathematical ability become one of history’s greatest scientists?

His true gift was different – and often overlooked.

Einstein had an extraordinary ability to cut through complexity and focus on what was essential. When others got lost in complicated details, he could zero in on what really mattered by ignoring the rest.

As physicist John Wheeler noted in his memoir about Einstein, his genius wasn’t in understanding more complex things than others – it was in recognizing the fundamental importance of simplicity.

Many a man in the street thinks of Einstein as a man who could only make headway in his work by dint of pages of complicated mathematics; the truth is the direct opposite. As Hilbert put it, “Every boy in the streets of our mathematical Gottingen understands more about four-dimensional geometry than Einstein. Yet, despite that, Einstein did the work and not the mathematicians.” Time and again, in the photoelectric effect, in relativity, in gravitation, the amateur grasped the simple point that had eluded the expert.

It would be easy to assume Einstein was born with this ability to simplify. But the truth is he deliberately cultivated it throughout his adult life.

“I soon learned,” Einstein wrote, “to scent out what was able to lead to fundamentals and to turn aside from everything else, from the multitude of things that clutter up the mind.”

Where did Einstein acquire this ability to sift the essential from the non-essential?

In the view of many, the position of clerk of the Swiss patent office was no proper job at all, but it was the best job available to anyone with (Einstein’s) unpromising university record. He served in the Bern office for seven years, from June 23, 1902 to July 6, 1909. Every morning he faced his quote of patent applications. Those were the days when a patent application had to be accompanied by a working model. Over and above the applications and the models was the boss, a kind man, a strict man, a wise man. He gave strict instructions: explain very briefly, if possible in a single sentence, why the device will work or why it won’t; why the application should be granted or why it should be denied.

Day after day Einstein had to distill the central lesson out of objects of the greatest variety that man has power to invent. Who knows a more marvelous way to acquire a sense of what physics is and how it works? It is no wonder that Einstein always delighted in the machinery of the physical world—from the action of a compass needle to the meandering of a river, and from the perversities of a gyroscope to the drive of Flettner’s rotor ship.

Perhaps it’s no accident that a patent clerk discovered the theory of relativity.

“Who else,” Wheeler writes, “could have distilled this simple central point from all the clutter of electromagnetism than someone whose job it was over and over to extract simplicity out of complexity.”

We have a passion for keeping things simple.

Most of us struggle to identify what deserves our attention. Our instinct is togather more information, thinking it will clarify things.

But when you find yourself searching without knowing exactly what you’re seeking, it’s a sign you don’t truly understand the problem. Understanding brings the ability to know what information matters and what information doesn’t.

When we treat all information as equally valuable, we inevitably overvalue the trivial and undervalue the essential.

What sets the truly exceptional apart is their remarkable ability to focus on the few crucial variables while ignoring everything else.

Most information we encounter doesn’t matter, and chasing it wastes precious time. When we learn what to ignore, we can focus our energy on what truly counts – and that focus leads to better results.

The good news is that we can all develop this ability to separate the essential from the noise. Here’s how:

Read Next

Discover What You’re Missing



As seen on:

© 2025 Farnam Street Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.Proudly powered byWordPress. Hosted byPressable. See ourPrivacy Policy.

We’reSyrus Partners.We buy amazing businesses.

Farnam Street participates in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising commissions by linking to Amazon.