Farnam Street

Mastering the best of what other people have already figured out

In 1996,Charlie Mungergave a talk titledPractical Thought about Practical Thought, where he explained the success of Coca-Cola using the simplest,most fundamental mental modelshe could find. Ideas from the physical world, biology, psychology, and business.

Munger starts the speech by outlining five simple notions that help him quickly solve problems. This approach is worth downloading into your brain. Munger’s approach is very similar to those of Elon Musk and Richard Feynman.

Here is the 5-step formula Munger advocates:

You want to give bad thinking nowhere to hide. Too often, complexity hides obvious insights.

… it is usually best to simplify problems by deciding big “no-brainer” questions first.

Teach yourself to think quantitatively and in probabilities.

[this] helpful notion mimics Galileo’s conclusion that scientific reality is often revealed only by math, as if math was the language of God. Galileo’s attitude also works well in messy practical life. Without numerical fluency, in the part of life most of us inhabit, you are like a one-legged man in an ass-kicking contest.

Inverting the problemwon’t always solve it, but it will get you closer to your objectives. Call it the avoiding stupidity filter.

… it is not enough to think problems through forward. You must also think in reverse, much like the rustic who wanted to know where he was going to die so that he’d never go there. Indeed, many problems can’t be solved forward. And that is why the great algebraist, Carl Jacobi, so often said: “invert, always invert.” And why Pythagoras thought in reverse to prove that the square root of two was an irrational number.

Understand the big nuggets of wisdom in thethree buckets of useful knowledge.

Munger believes in using these regularly and in combination:

… the best and most practical wisdom is elementary academic wisdom. But there is one extremely important qualification: you must think in a multidisciplinary manner. You must routinely use all the easy-to-learn concepts from the freshman course in every basic subject. Where elementary ideas will serve, your problem solving must not be limited, as academia and many business bureaucracies are limited, by extreme balkanization into disciplines and subdisciplines, with strong taboos against any venture outside assigned territory. …

If, in your thinking, you rely on others, often through purchase of professional advice, whenever outside a small territory of your own, you will suffer much calamity.

This happens partly because professional advisors are often undone, not by their conscious malfeasance but by troubles found in their subconscious bias.

His cognition will often be impaired, for your purposes, by financial incentives different from yours. And he will also suffer from the psychological defect caught by the proverb: to a man with a hammer, every problem looks like a nail.”

And you need to watch out for when really big ideas combine.

… really big effects, lollapalooza effects, will often come only from large combinations of factors. For instance, tuberculosis was tamed, at least for a long time, only by routine combined use in each case of three different drugs. And other lollapalooza effects, like the flight of an airplane, follow a similar pattern.

***

Still Curious?I’d combine the 5 simple notions above withlearning how to think.

Learn how Munger applies all of these concepts inthis essay. Learn more about the wit and wisdom of Charlie Munger by picking up a copy ofPoor Charlie’s AlmanackandDamn Right!: Behind the Scenes with Berkshire Hathaway billionaire Charlie Munger.

Read Next

Discover What You’re Missing



As seen on:

© 2025 Farnam Street Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.Proudly powered byWordPress. Hosted byPressable. See ourPrivacy Policy.

We’reSyrus Partners.We buy amazing businesses.

Farnam Street participates in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising commissions by linking to Amazon.