I'm into winning and into ideas. I like
both. This is where you can do new
things. This where you can build new
companies. How do you decide what to
focus on, what to work on in our
society? People tend to overindex on
these sociological factors. What's
popular? I would tell people to go into
the place where I quibble with the name
of your show is that uh at the extreme
optimism and pessimism are the same
thing. When we started Palunteer, the
idea of trying to do a military related
software startup, people thought we were
insane. Yeah. We had to sue the army.
All our consultants quit. Can't sue your
customer. If Austin can be fixed, you
you'll be the one to fix it. If it can't
be fixed, I'll be the one to have told
you so. This is Peter trolling me.
CEO and Cole Brown.
[Music]
Now I'm here.
Peter Teal is truly one of the great
minds of Western civilization. He's been
an important mentor to me, someone I've
been lucky to get to learn from and
partner with in business since I first
came into the business world 20 years
ago. He's constantly reinventing
himself. He's constantly exploring and
looking at the world from totally new
angles. He's been successful again and
again and again in a variety of
different areas. And it's always a
delight to get to talk to Peter, to get
to hear about what he's thinking about,
what he's pondering, and to hear what's
next for our civilization. To get to
hear some unique views he always has. He
always has an orthogonal take on things,
and he's always working on the cutting
edge of what's going to happen next in
the world. Let's hear from Peter Teal.
Welcome to American Optimist. really
excited to have my old friend and mentor
and American legend Peter Teal here with
us on the show. Yeah, Peter, I got to
describe you as founder of PayPal and
and Palanteer and Founders Fund is how
how else would you describe yourself?
Founder, investor. I don't know. I like
figuring things out where the world's
going. I'm I I'm into winning and into
ideas. I like both winning and ideas. I
always think of you as kind of an
applied philosopher, but you don't like
the term philosopher.
It sounds really lame, actually.
Well, you're in Austin for a special
lecture series at UATX. Let's start
there just briefly. What's been your
impression of our new university and the
students? It is it is surprisingly
strong. I uh I I you know I I but you
know, Joe, I I I've told you before that
if if you don't pull off University of
Austin, if you're not able to create a
successful university at this time when
they're all committing suicide, engaged
in self-destruct, uh it is like uh it's
like an absolutely hopeless thing to do.
So, uh, um, but I think, um,
uh, yeah, I I I think the the caliber of
the people is is is is really high. And
I've I've done a decent amount of
lecturing, speaking at, uh, at different
universities in the last uh, in the last
few years. And it is it's just it's just
striking how there's um, it's very
unclear what people are doing. Uh, it's,
you know, it was it was a big
achievement in a way for them to for
students to get into you know, elite
colleges like Yale or Harvard or or
Stanford. Um but uh they're completely
lost once they're there. Um you know,
high school still has an organizing
function for it where the point of high
school is to get into college. Yeah. And
then um college, you know, elite
universities, I I think the organizing
function 50 plus years ago was you were
supposed to get into the the elite in
our society. and um and that has
completely broken down. You know, there
was there was an Alen Bloom speech at
Harvard in the 1980s where uh he started
with this obnoxious framing. It was my
fellow elitists because everyone at
Harvard pretended to be egalitarian, but
they were secretly elitist. And I think
uh I think you couldn't give that speech
at Harvard today because uh there's
nothing elite about it. Nothing about
forming an elite. uh you're not you
can't even pretend it behind closed
doors or or anything like that. And uh
and so and so for the next generation of
people going into these places uh
they're just they're just really lost.
This is unclear what to do. It's
interesting. A lot of our elite
institutions are broken down where
they're not as Yeah. But they're not
they're not they're not elite
institutions. They're not anymore. A lot
of the institutions that run our society
have kind of broken. So they're not
elite. And of course of course the the
institutions they they feed into are
probably also much less elite. So I
don't know 1950s and60s the CIA was
elite and you know people at Harvard and
Yale would would get in there at this
point probably I don't know they
probably done too many illegal drugs to
to get into CIA. You probably wouldn't
want to get into CIA. It's not elite
anymore. Yeah. But you know there's
there there no real elite institutions
it tracks into. There were all these
things around it that were the best
things in our society that aren't
anymore. So so stepping back a second
then is the question. We have a lot of
builders and investors in our audience
and we have these kids at these top
colleges. Some of them are pretty smart.
Assume you're talking to like a smart,
ambitious person. How do you decide what
to focus on, what to work on in our
society? What should their goals be at
this point? you know, it's I I'm always
I'm always so bad at the sort of how to
how to help
advice, but I but I but I I I would I
would say that for the last 25, 30
years,
uh tech um meaning broadly, you know,
computer
science, software, internet, mobile
internet, uh now now crypto and AI uh
and the and In the last few years, this
has been this there's been this has been
sort of this this one vector of of
progress in our society. This is where
you can do new things. This where you
can build uh new companies. Uh we can
debate, you know, whether it's big
enough to take our civilization to a new
level or whether it's just big enough to
build, you know, companies that are
worth billions or hundreds of billions
or trillions of dollars. Um but it's
been sort of the one place you can um
meaningfully do things. And then almost
everything else is uh is is somehow
stale sclerotic you know uh it's
extremely malthusian in practice. You
know, I was I was I studied philosophy
as an undergraduate and then went to law
school, which you know, I didn't
realize, but when major in philosophy as
a sophomore, you're actually deciding to
go to law school and then you sort of
get narrowed. Um, and in theory, law
school gets advertised as this broad
form of graduate education, but you just
get narrowed into being a a corporate
lawyer. And it's probably of the, you
know, law, banking, medicine,
consulting, those are like the four big
tracks you people had at Stanford in the
probably in the late 80s when I was
there. Probably also in the early 2000s
when you were there. Maybe twothirds of
the undergraduates were were on one of
those four tracks. Um, law is the one
that's held up the best, I would say.
And it's still pretty, you know, it's
pretty unhappy. Yeah. I would tell
people to go into tech. Yeah. that that
that and that's that's broadly what
you're supposed to do. Um, and you know,
it doesn't necessarily mean you should
start start a company, but there are,
you know, there's sort of a a range of
of these companies you can work for. And
it's it's surprising how much that's
still not the narrative, you know,
especially like if you're if you're at
the I don't know at
the at a place like Harvard, my my
impression is they don't even know that
Zuckerberg
created meta Facebook at Harvard. It's
it's like this is this is they're
disconnected from they're disconnected
from that. They have not even caught up
to 2005. So at the time I was we were
working I was working for you working on
the hedge fund you were invested in
Facebook you're doing other investing
and we decided to really go all in and
spend a lot of time on Palunteer. Why
why was that the right choice then as
tech but go more specifically like what
what what was what was your high level
around that at that time? How were you
thinking about it? What what gap were we
going after? It was very broadly uh
government and then it was within that
it was defense uh more narrowly it was
sort of the the um intelligence
community that sort of adj you know
defense adjacent uh
I you know it was it was a couple of
years after 9/11 we're sort of starting
it in 2003
2004 and uh there were all these ways
that uh I felt that we didn't you know
that we that we had these very low tech
and very privacy violating solutions for
the terrorism problem. You know, it was
it was annoying that you had to take off
your shoes at every airport, which was
like just not security, but it was this
incredibly intrusive security theater.
And uh and then yeah, the the question
was could you do something where you'd
have, you know, way more security with
way fewer um you know, technologies
doing more with less. And so the the
terrorism context was could we have more
security against terrorists with less
intrusive um civil liberties violations?
And then um and then and then there was
broadly this question, you know, was was
there some way to to reset all these
things in the government? And uh it was
a black box and you know we did not know
whether places like the CIA and NSA and
places like that had you know some super
duper computer working in the background
that was catching all the terrorists. Um
we sort of suspected they didn't um and
um and then it took it took a while to
figure that out but uh I think our
suspicions were probably correct. Yeah,
we saw them doing a lot of things that
made us suspect that they actually
gotten way behind Silicon Valley. And
there were I mean there were details
that you know it was hard to say you
know with our I remember our first trip
to Langley in uh in 2000 2005 we got an
inqel to invest and you and I were there
and I think it took us about a day or
two to process but you know at the end
of the trip it was like do you want to
come do you want to buy some stuff from
the CIA gift shop and it was like you
can get a windbreaker and a CIA cap
coins they were kind of cool I think
they were half of them were made in
China which was you know but but um and
then of course there was probably some
you know there's some steelman version
where the the it was just a decoy and
there was really a lot of stuff going on
in the background. But uh do you
remember the doors all had these like
eye detectors on each of the door that
you're supposed to scan your eye to get
in, but none of them worked. So there so
wherever you go around there would be
like the eye detector but they were
broken. They turned them all off which I
thought was kind of like a kind of a
typical I don't know there you know
there yeah there all these all all these
PL and so in that context you you you'd
think okay there's there's some very big
problem that can be can be solved. it
you know in some ways it turned out to
be more difficult than uh than one would
have thought. Uh you know there
obviously are all these pro all these
sectors where you have that are very
very broken where um you know education,
healthcare all all these sort of deeply
broken sectors where the solution
um you know there's some obvious
solutions and the fact they have not
been implemented tells you there's some
big barriers to implementation. They're
set up not to allow you to break them.
This is kind of what I think of the
palanteer version is, you know, there
was uh there was this uh forget what the
acronym stands for. There was this uh
software program. This was once we moved
from intelligence community into the
broader military called Dyn which was
just sort of this um in theory was a
system we were supposed to figure out
ways to integrate the data across all
these uh units in the field and
headquarters and you know integrate what
was going on which is incredibly
important thing to do. In practice, uh,
it was a sort of a cluji
consultant billion-dollar boondoggle
that didn't work. And, uh, and we
naturally thought we would replace it in
in 6 months. And it took it took
something like 10 years. We finally
replaced it in in 2019. And, you know,
we had to sue the army, which and, you
know, we had all our all our consultants
quit and said, you know, um, this is
just the most ridiculous thing. You'll
never get a you can't sue your customer.
And, um, you definitely can't sue the
army. And uh not only will you not get
them as a customer, you will not get
anybody else in DC. You'll just be black
ballalled by everybody. And then but
then you know um and it was under we we
it was in 2016 that we sued them. It was
under a 1994 law where um you know the
military was supposed to have an open
procurement process and then when you uh
and then what you can do when you sue
somebody is you you get discovery and
you discover and you sort of discover
what's going on in the sausage making
factory that no one's investigated for
22 years and there's a lot of stuff and
there were sort of you know there were
internal reports that Palanteer worked
better which didn't matter because
obviously nobody can assess the software
but then more scandalously there were um
you know there were um orders to
suppress the reports. There were emails
that people had to hide the findings and
there was a cover up and this this did
did not sound like the open procurement
process and uh and then you know and you
you won at the court level then you won
at the district at the DC circuit level
and uh you know you were forced to they
were forced to reopen the process and
then you know after after a decade we we
sort of got the contract. So yeah, so
there was something that was doable, but
it was it was not as straightforward as
it as it sounded. It feels like there's
these and SpaceX had to sue as well, of
course. It feels like there's these
parts of our society that are set up to
just maintain their broken nature, and
you have to just punch really, really,
really hard through them. And it's very
rare people do that, you know. Yeah.
SpaceX was the first successful template
to do it. Uh
and and there's, you know, there's
obviously something like this. you know,
the university system seems as broken or
or more than the military procurement
process and then especially with the,
you know, crediting agencies and all
these things where where they where they
just uh are designed to to prevent
newcomers and the it's it's like if you
actually had a newcomer, they would just
eat the field. They try to crush you.
They try to crush you. It took us
thousands of pages of regulation. But I
think there was an Elon metaphor he told
me once and this is like I I don't
remember when it was like maybe 2010
2011 and it was it was it was sort of
like uh there were there were these
three or four aerospace companies in the
US that were like really badly managed
and badly run and it was sort of they
were these very fat cows on this grassy
enclosed field and if you ever got in
there there was just going to be a blood
bath. Oh yeah. So it's kind of it's like
he's like this this this carnivore and
there's a big fence and you got to climb
this really big fence. Eventually you
get in there it's going to be it's but
so so this is a very optimistic thing
though because both Elon and and what we
built together uh with Palunteer were
able to be great enough and persistent
enough to overcome unnatural barriers
and and do something very optimistic and
fix things. is should we also be trying
to do that in healthcare and education
and universities in some sense is it
because it was almost impossible but it
turned out after like years of work that
we did it shouldn't we also do that now
in other areas it is it is worth trying
in a lot of areas look I I always think
it's better to be optimistic than
pessimistic it is um it's probably not I
the the place where I quibble with the
name of your show is that uh I I don't
think it's I don't think it's good to be
uh insanely optimist istic or insanely
pessimistic. Uh at the extreme, optimism
and pessimism are the same thing because
if you are extremely pessimistic,
there's nothing you can do. If you're
extremely optimistic, there's nothing
you need to do. Um you just need to um
you know, the singularity is near. It's
the Curtzsw Wild uh book titles very
optimistic title and all you need to do
is sit back and eat some popcorn and
watch the movie of the future unfold. So
both extreme optimism and extreme
pessimism um converge on laziness and on
people not doing anything. So uh so I so
I I yeah so I think moderate optimism is
the correct thing and then and then I I
I think you have to always pick pick
your battles. the the part that's
um the part
that's I think more difficult about
education and health care um or
historically was more difficult was that
these were these were areas that lots of
people were trying to reform and there
were lots of different attempts people
had uh if um whereas let's say the in
2004 2003 2004 2005 when we started
Palunteer
um the idea of trying to uh to do a
military related uh software startup.
There was nobody even wanted to give you
money as a venture capitalist. People
thought we were insane. And so there was
sort of an element where if you could
get through you would have no
competition and then you know a decade
later we still had no competition.
There's probably a lot more going on in
the in the defense space now than there
was in the in the mid 2000s. But and and
again and again having zero
competition it it's good if it works
maybe it just tells you you're insane.
So even that's an ambiguous thing. But
then the um the the place where I've had
we probably the two areas where I've had
the you know we we've tried to invest I
at this venture capital thing. We
started founders fund 2005 in different
ways. I've been been at this and I'd
done some angel investing before that,
but I've been been doing this for 20
plus years. And the area where we've
probably had the least success from a
returns basis in software, the two worst
areas are um are educational software
related companies and healthcare IT
companies. And um and pro like education
we felt was so hard we we didn't even uh
we did very little. healthcare. We tried
a few more things, but um it's and and
and the the the rough version of what's
gone wrong in the health care sectors.
We've done so little in education, I
feel I can't even comment on it, but but
healthcare, what's what's roughly gone
wrong is um you have all sorts of things
that sound like a pretty good plan for
reforming the system. And it's okay,
it's this one angle on the pricing model
that you need to change, but then there
are 10 different ways you can do it. And
it's these complicated uh ways you have
to get the payments to shift from the
insurance companies or the government or
uh the hospitals which are very cluji.
If you can just get consumers or doctors
to change that might be easier but they
they typically are not the people who
pay. And so there sort of are there's
this you know very cluji messed up
system. Lots of people try try to do it.
My my sociological model is always that
I'm I'm deeply skeptical of um of
investments where a lot of VCs uh would
go to some silly VC networking event and
uh want to brag about it. And I I I feel
there there's a lot of that with the
healthc care education startups. Um this
is like the green tech stuff too. It's
too popular green tech stuff. Yeah. I
mean at some point it it loses money and
then it's not popular anymore but but
while it lasts it's very popular because
there's there's no fastterm
accountability in venture capital you
know sometimes you have momentum and the
valuations go up and that that does give
you a feel whether things are working
but in practice uh you off you know it's
5 10 years later you get liquidity on on
these businesses or even longer it it
takes incredibly long and so people tend
to overindex on these sociological
factors and what's what's popular. And
that's and so there was there was a
there's a way that uh the healthc care
education sectors even though they're
very broken um people have these often
too conventional ideas on how to fix
them and um and so yeah it's I know you
know another trend where I' I've tried
investing some over over the last decade
is you know is is all these marijuana
related businesses and it's like yeah
it's obviously like a big trend Um, but
it's it's an obvious trend and then it
turned out to be extremely hard to
figure out what what to do with Yeah. I
said some of the things things that are
too popular and too obvious. It's just
you have to have a totally different
take on them or it's not going to work.
Uh yeah, you like if you have an
unpopular take on it that that that
might work. That that's interesting. I I
want to I want to pivot to macro for a
little bit. We're a few months into the
new administration. Uh Donald Trump uh
hired a lot of people, a lot of people
we know are working in different parts
of the administration. Uh be I'm going
to maybe obviously obligatory question
on trade, but first like what are you
most excited about that's going on the
administration right now? Are there
things that you think are really cool or
things they're doing well? I'm the most
hopeful I've been about things in a in a
long time. I think uh I think there are
some very deep problems that need to be
fixed. I think uh I think the opposition
is is completely exhausted and out of
ideas. And so um so it's it's it's maybe
the first time since um since early
Reagan that there's uh there's really an
opportunity to um to uh to change some
things in this country. And and it's not
the sort of uh lame Bush Republican
thing we had in the you know um for for
a long time in between. And I don't
think it's the uh completely sabotaged
first Trump administration where you had
I don't know um it it it got blocked on
every level outside and inside the
administration. Yeah. So I I think they
will get you know and it's very unusual.
Normally the second term does less than
the first term. This this is going to be
the I think will be the real first term.
Yeah. I have a lot of really bold
friends in HHS and DoD and Department of
Education and all these places. And then
there also are extremely big things that
are very broken. you have a, you know,
you have a 6% current account 6% budget
deficit of 6% of GDP but five or 6% bud
uh GDP budget deficit and and that's
basically that there's probably no fun
way to fix that. You know, you raise
taxes, you cut you cut spending, you
know, there probably are some efficiency
gains you can make, but what do you
think of Doge? Speaking of efficiency
gains, it's like can they get half a
trillion dollars with Doge? Like what
what can they do? What do you think? Can
we do more? I think there's a lot you
can get. There's going to be a lot of
resistance to getting it. You have to,
you know, the um the the correct answer
is just you need, you know, is is always
my my correct my, you know, the my
answer on tax policy. You know, what
should tax rates be? Just always a
little bit lower. Not going to tell you
the number. They should always be a
little bit lower. And you know, how how
much should it should always be? The
government should be more efficient. And
then once you've made it more efficient,
you should make it more efficient. And
uh there's uh a lot of room for that.
There's a lot of shocking there's a lot
of shocking stuff there. Funny even
shock. I wouldn't want to limit it to
half I don't know. It's it's a what is
it? It's a $4 trillion annual spend
budget. I think I think I think it's
higher now. Yeah. And of course you know
a lot of that's entitlements but I think
I think six and a half now actually
because I think four is what we're
taking in. Four something we're taking
in. We're spending six and a half
because 3.8's entitlements. That's a
lot. Um, yeah. And
but even even the non-entitlement piece
is, you know, is incredibly is
incredibly off. No. And entitlements
have lots of fraud, too. Probably. And
but I I've been a little bit shocked.
Like I knew there was waste, but there
seems like a lot of scams they're
finding. I guess like a lot more scams,
I guess, than I I think there were
scams. I think the nonprofit stuff is is
the NGO stuff's out of control. Is
really out of control. It's it's it's
sort of like um I don't know. It's it's
it's sort of like ver virtue signaling
is a sign that you're doing something
evil and and and so many so much of this
uh left-wing philanthropy nonprofit
world I think was you know it was just a
cover for you know borderline criminal.
That's how you shield yourself. You have
put a virtue signal up while you're
stealing money from everyone. Yeah. Um
there's one one of the and there's all
the stuff you have you'd have to really
go into the weeds of how the stuff
works, but the way it was explained to
me there's there's sort of a level five
description which is a line item you
know description of what the actual
dollars are going to and then there are
ways these things get summarized and the
way they got summarized for you know a
lot of the political appointees was a
level four description where you
summarize a bunch of level five
descriptions as a you know as an
alternate as in a level four way. And
then obviously there are ways you know
you can have I don't know
um you can have
um 20 groups that are you know providing
food to to Africa different African
countries and you can summarize that as
food to Africa. That's maybe an accurate
description. And then if they're
actually all working on the Biden
re-election that's an that's an
inaccurate description. And at some
point the descriptions are so inaccurate
that the people in the government could
be prosecuted for fraud. And um you know
one of one of uh one of the uh one of
one of the people um who who looked I
know who looked at this a lot thinks you
could just prosecute these people for
fraud. This is something like this is
what Oliver North was prosecuted for in
the Iran Contra scandal in the 80s was
he mischaracterized the money and he
mislabeled it and it was like you know
was accused of defrauding the government
and I think you could prosecute
thousands of these people for criminally
for the thing that they wanted to
prosecute Oliver North for in the 80s.
Well, I hope they do. I think a lot of
people need to be punished not to do it
again. Otherwise, it's going to get
turned back on. Let's I want to ask you,
we've been talking about China on and
off for over 20 years and their
imbalances. Uh I think this week uh the
president declared trade war on them
effectively with 125% tariffs as of as
of now. It'll probably change in the
next few days because these things keep
changing. So, but it is like like what
what do you think of the trade and
tariff policy? What's going to happen?
Bond yield sold off more than I expected
with yields went higher than I expected
so far. Like what's what's going on?
Well, it's yeah, I'm hesitant to comment
sense. Obviously, it's a very very fluid
situation, but but something like the
sort of reset that's they're talking
about now see seems where we're going
where you need a very drastic reset with
China. Um, in theory, you need a reset
with other people, but um what we really
need to get them to do is also reset
things with China. I I you know I think
the rough numbers are that about a
quarter of the US trade deficit is
bilaterally with China but another
quarter is indirectly with China. So
China is is sort of half the problem and
and so it's selling components that then
get reassembled elsewhere and uh and so
and uh and then China is the
geopolitical rival. So um you know
there's there's a way in which if you
know people in in a I don't know in a
Merced in Mercedes and Germany are
selling cars to the US we might want to
have those pretty well-paying jobs in
the US and not in Germany and there all
kinds of sort of mercantalist policies
that at the margins Germany engages in
but um you know it's not going to it's
probably not going to repurpose um the
Mercedes factory to build tanks to
invade the US or something like this
whereas um whereas this you know the
sort of dual use problem is is the
problem with China and so it's it's you
know there's there sort of are there are
ways the economic relationship with
China is is is fairly efficient you know
if people working for you know a dollar
and a half an hour in a Foxcon factory
we don't really want to get those jobs
in Wisconsin but um but it is this
geopolitical rivalry where um that's in
the background where that you have to
somehow factor in this that the
economists never able to factor in
properly with China. And so I think
yeah, the the uh I don't know, I'm not
sure it's I would call this the
optimistic plan, but but the the um the
reset in trade that seems desirable to
me would be that uh
um we we radically change the
relationship with China and we sort of
induce a lot of other countries to
radically change their relationship with
China. and
um and uh that's that's how we you know
and maybe that's how we build a stronger
western alliance of the free world.
There's going to be some interesting
negotiations in the next few months. Do
do you think that we could bring maybe
using AI some more advanced
manufacturing here that was in China? Is
that a real thing the next decade to do
a bunch more of here thanks to our more
efficiencies and productivity? Uh
there's there's there's probably always
a decent amount of things like that. You
you have to um you you have to always be
extremely granular on how expensive the
robots are, how expensive the equipment
is because in some sense
manufacturing has been getting steadily
more automated for 250 years and you
know and and you've had the machines
that make the machines the machines that
make the machines are getting sort of
smarter and more complicated. Um and and
there are ways in which AI is a quantum
leap. There's a way in which it's just
you know a natural continuation of this
you know two century two century long
long process. Um I think um but yeah I
think I think there are some parts that
can be moved to the US um with AI maybe
also if you if you change some of the
environmental rules and some some of the
other anti-industrial policies we have
in the US. Um and then but then if if
parts of this are moved to um other
emerging market countries um you know I
I don't Vietnam is look it's a communist
country it's it's it's a it has bad
mercantalist policies but it's not
planning to take over the world and so
at the margins if we can move things
from China to Vietnam that's a big win.
I want to ask you about a theory I have
that's based on how you see things. So,
one of the things you've been talking a
lot about lately is is is is how our
culture I want I want to put words in
your mouth, but things are broken to
such an extent that like we're not
advancing as quickly as we were in the
in the industrial revolution, right?
Something's wrong with our culture.
Something's wrong with science. It's not
not advancing. Yeah. I would Yeah. The
there's it's generally been stagnant in
the world of atoms, not the world of
bits for something like 50 years. And um
and then yeah, why why it's happened is
overdetermined, but there are cultural
factors. Maybe we just ran out of ideas,
which is a very pessimistic version.
Maybe there's something wrong in our
culture. Maybe we're too riskaverse.
Maybe we're we're scared about how
apocalyptic some of the science and tech
are. Um, but for for a range of
different reasons, it's it's slowed down
since the 1970s. And I I I tend to think
of things, and I'm not sure if this is
how you see it, but I take I take some
of maybe your interest in Gerard and
mimedic theory, and I say people tend to
all think of things the same way, even
when it's incorrect, because it's
natural to be mimedic. think of things
the wrong way together. That's kind of
why culture is moving the wrong way. And
so I I tend to see that there's a lot of
opportunities right now thanks to the
fact that you do have this kind of
broken cultural situation where people
are thinking of it wrong. So for
example, I'm particularly bullish. I
know it's granted, but on Elon's Boring
Company, I'm excited. I was working on
with some of the guys yesterday on
tunnels because I think it's just
obvious we could create trillions of
dollars of value by building tunnels and
getting rid of traffic around our cities
and and the reason that opportunity
exists is because of this thing that's
really broken because it's an obvious
thing, but just it's so broken that no
one's doing it. Is there are there
things like that where there's
opportunities tied to the fact that
things are broken? Do you see it that
way? Well, th those those anything that
fits that pattern is a great
opportunity. So, if if it's um if you
have some if if you know it's it's
always if it's broken not because of the
science or tech. So, it doesn't require
a
miraculous you know you don't have to
have a dozen miracles in terms of tech
breakthroughs. Yeah, you have to just do
something in this, you know, in this
non-mafia controlled drilling way or
whatever where, you know, I think so
many of the um tunneling is this a super
corrupt um contracting. It's mafia
adjacent, you know, sort of super
corrupt labor union adjacent. And so, I
don't know, it costs, you know, what it
cost to build a subway in Manhattan.
It's like a billion dollars a mile.
Billions. Yeah. 10 I think it's 10 times
as much as Paris or something like that
which we don't think exactly capitalist
efficiency it's insane so and Elon's a
10th the cost of Paris right so it's
like a 100x multiple crazy but you know
but then the the the place where I I
always think it's non-trivial is uh is
that there's there's some non- tech
reason we're not even at the Paris
level. Yep. Yep. So, but if you could
push through, then you could disagree.
You could do it even you can do you
could do something big even if you could
get to the Paris level and uh and so you
have to think really hard about what
that what that political blocker is and
how to how to overcome that and and so
there's all these things that are that
are dysfunctional and broken and not
working and like and like if things
right now I think you're more optimistic
than you have been. said like like
should we be trying to use our voice and
fix things more? Should like I know a
lot of friends who just decided to exit,
right? And a lot of friends are in
Singapore and Switzerland, they gave up.
They think it's going to be too hard to
fix it. I feel like you I feel like
you're in between this where you're
you've done a lot of things to fight for
our society and to fix a lot of things,
but then you're like skeptical. You
should be pushing too hard in a bunch of
areas. How do you think about that
trade-off with voice and exit on these
things? I think it's I think it's very
important to try. It's very important to
pick It's very important to pick the
right battles is what I is is what I
would always what I would always say.
And so I don't know. Yeah. The the the
in between answer is um you know I I
don't think you can just be I don't know
shooting at bad guys when they're two
miles away and you're firing your guns
at random and it's it's like yeah you
get you get credit for some kind of you
know Marxist labor theory of value.
You're trying hard but um we're not
we're not Marxists here and we're it's
not about trying. It's about actually
it's about it's it's not we're not
measuring uh input. We're measuring you
know where where you can actually uh
where you can actually get output. I I
um I I keep trying in a lot of these
areas. I you know we we've we've we've
made a number of investments over the
years in um in nuclear technology. Um
and it it always it always when you look
at the science that there are all these
much better ways that in theory you
could do it. You could build small
modular fision reactors. Maybe the
fusion technolog is not that far away.
There are different verticals within the
industry where things are extremely
broken and in theory should find a way
to to um to build a successful company
that overcomes some of these these
problems. And then um there's you know
then there's a sobering reality that uh
you know the nuclear regulatory
commission basically hasn't approved a
new reactor design in in 50 plus years.
And so there's so so it's always it's
it's always these these these these
things that you're you're trading off
probably I don't know probably one place
where I'm I'm structurally a little bit
more
pessimistic is that uh there's there's
something about the cities that I think
is very hard to reform. Uh and
um and uh you know I'm I'm in I'm in Los
Angeles. We just had these catastrophic
fires. And
what's what's what's what's I think just
depressing about it is that, you know,
it's there are half a dozen reasons we
can give for the fires. It can be, you
know, it can be the California Coastal
Commission that didn't allow people to
build modern houses that were fireproof.
It can be um it can be the fire
department that didn't have you know
where there was no water in the
reservoir. Uh it can be the um you know
the three Kristen women running the fire
department who maybe will be now
replaced by three Karen women or
something like this. Or it can be the uh
homeless people with blowtorrches
running around or you know and or it can
be the the mayor who is you know out to
lunch in Africa or whatever.
and um and and somehow the pessimistic
thing is that uh I I maybe the mayor
gets turned to scapegoat and gets you
know doesn't get reelected or something
like this but uh but that that's about
the that's about the limit and then this
just looks like a a structurally hard
hard to reform thing. It's very hard to
fix LA. But couldn't then this is where,
you know, this is where this is I where
I would be deeply skeptical even of of a
place like Austin, Texas. You know, it's
it is I mean it's a government town.
It's a bad university, college town. It
is a good university. Well, University
Texas, not not University of Austin.
We're doing well, but even UT has some
great students, too. It's not too bad.
Yeah. The whole the whole the whole
structure, the professors are going to
be more progressive. They're going to
break they're going to break the
politics economic structure economic
structure. But there is an answer here.
There is an answer here, right? So
what's fascinating is in the Texas
constitution cities only exist at the
behest of the state. And so if you
actually got the city to be a little
more if it became a little more broken
and you get the legislators and the
governor step up, you can create a
capital district and you actually run it
like in a competent way. So I I think
the very first governor to actually fix
a blue city will be like a hero and then
you'll do it in a bunch of other red
states. So I think it's possible, right?
Um am I am I just totally naive here?
What? You've had 20 years of Republican
governors. Why have they not pushed for
this in tax? You've had a bunch of Bush
Republicans, as you would call them, who
and I and I I like Greg Abbott. I think
he's a good guy, but there's just not
like the energy to like go in and be
like, "We are just going to this
and fix it and it's unacceptable and
we're getting rid of this nonsense."
There has not been that energy yet in
the party. So, like, if I, for example,
were to take over in 10 years and do
that, I would just fix the city. I say,
"This is unacceptable. It's broken.
Here's what we're going to do instead."
Like, there's the fact there's more
people dying from not having enough
police. The fact it's just insane. We
just got to fix it, you know? That's
what I would do. Okay. Anyway, this is
where this is where I would push back
where you know the just walking around
Austin the last few days, it seems like
there are a lot of homeless people right
now the progressives are in charge.
Yeah, that's that's in the city. You're
right. You're right. As his problem and
then and then somehow it doesn't bother,
you know, it doesn't bother the
Republican governor because, you know,
Republicans well, they don't have to
live in Austin, they live elsewhere. And
maybe I think it bothers him and they've
talked about making a capital district.
I think there's I think they need to
they need Yeah, there's a lot they're
trying to do well right now. Not a it's
not a top 10 issue. Yeah, it's not yet
and I think it should be. So just going
back to the question then like so do you
I think so we talk about so so yes I
there's there's some there's some point
where it's you know it's it's the right
battle to to pick but you can't you
can't do all of them obviously you can't
I don't know I know this is probably not
the best analogy but it's if if you go
surfing you know it's yeah you you want
to paddle just in front of a wave you
have to you have but the wave has to be
there. Yeah. And if you're if you're
paddling like crazy on a still day where
there are no waves, it doesn't work.
Yeah. So, we live in these complex
systems and like a lot of people they
they basically are maybe too pessimistic
or too optimistic. Like you said, they
just think system's going to happen no
matter what. I guess for the great man
theory of history, you say it's not just
that a great man come and does
something. You have to understand the
system. You have to understand what's
possible. But you do believe people can
then make a big difference if you if you
understand it well enough. Yeah. You
have to there's there's probably some
sense of timing. There's there's there's
some point where where these things
where these things where these things
can break through.
Um you know
um yeah if if Austin can be fixed you'll
you'll be the one to fix it. Uh if it if
it can't be fixed I'll be the one to
have told you told you so and maybe
that's a lesser achievement. We will we
will we will we'll see what we could do.
There's been like the optimistic thing
is I think there are some other things
you could do that might be bigger than
fixing Austin. I am working on many big
things. They're important. So if you if
if you get too distracted by Austin,
this this could be a very very costly
mistake. Although although study you're
writing, you're selling yourself short.
You're just thinking fixing Austin is is
is this really big thing you can do. And
for an average for an average person,
this would be a big thing. But you know,
so I think studying SF and studying
Austin led me to understand the NGO
thing, which I then was very helpful
with with with DC. and we actually are
working with people running a lot of
agencies in DC to go after the NOS's and
based on things we've learned the last
seven years. So I think I think
sometimes studying the problem around
you kind of you follow the trail and you
do find useful things to fight for and
um let's you know speaking of timing
there's a big vibe shift going on in
Silicon Valley right now. I think I
think it's very different than it was
two years ago in a positive direction.
Some people say there's a even a
spiritual revival component to it. Like
do you think it's real and what's what's
what's changed in in the vibe in Silicon
Valley? What what's possible now based
on that? I I I think I think it has
uh I think it's shifted a lot. Um and
then of course it's you have to sort of
think about why was it so
monolithically center left before and um
and you can you can analyze it on the
level you know I was I was on the um I
was on um you know I was on the meta
board for 17 years from 2005 to 2022 and
uh there's sort of one version where it
was people
like Zuckerberg or Cheryl Sandberg were
just these sort of communist
billionaires. Um, and then there is a
there was sort of a bottomup theory
where it was kind of um this uh woke
millennial workforce that sort of this
mob that was ruling the company or
something like this. But then there's
also sort of a top- down theory that it
was basically um incredible pressure
from this uh left-wing regulatory state
that pushed these companies. And I
think, you know, I think that was that
was a a big a big dimension of it. There
there was sort of a lot of surface area
where these things could be regulated.
And as long as you sort of tilted them
to the left, you you ended up, you know,
you thought you thought you were
appeasing the the the beast. You
protected yourself. There there's some
way in which um the founders um again
cite someone like Zuckerberg I don't
think were you know deeply political. He
didn't want to you know he wanted to
spend his time building products
thinking about that. He didn't want to
spend his time you know at congressional
hearings in DC. It was just easiest to
do something. It was easiest to do
something. Um it and it often seemed
like it was sort of a moderate amount
you had to do. We had to do okay, we do
some DEI. It's you know we we'll get
credit for this and then it won't hurt
us that much. And um and then um and
then
basically at some point and then you
know if you if you do something and it
doesn't work. So let's say let's say
we're um doing
DEI but we are um our our workforce is
getting is not getting
better. Um um it's always ambiguous and
you can say you can say that you haven't
done enough of the thing or you have you
can say we have to stop it alto
together. And so the the way I would
tell the arc was for for many years the
answer was just we have to do more and
we have to do more and then at some
point it completely collapsed and that's
and that collapse happened in some way
over the last four or five years but it
was it wasn't really safe to admit it
until like the last several months right
I I
think I think it
was it felt very unsafe to admit it in
the first Trump administration because
in some ways all these things went into
overdrive and they were sort of
polarized around these sort of tribal
politics or the tribal politics were
used to push these things into
overdrive. Uh, I think by the time by
the time Biden came in, it was safe for
people behind closed doors to say this
stuff is is is really not working or you
know um you know uh and
um and then um and then and then
certainly by the time by the
time Trump came back it was um you Even
if people did not support President
Trump in 2024, didn't support him
publicly, uh there was a an incredible
felt sense among all the top CEOs I know
in Silicon Valley that there's all the
stuff you can't talk about. There are
things they tell me behind closed doors
that are very different from what they
feel they can say in public. And the the
gap the gap felt really really big for
you know a number of years. There's I I
know there was a one one of the bigger
tech companies um you know again there's
it's over the term there's a bottom up
top down you know middle-level
management layer there all sorts of
layers of the stuff that got messed up
but their version was yeah you had the
most woke workforce in San Francisco and
so it was just they were going to move a
certain percentage of their people out
of San Francisco every year and that was
that was that was the plan and then you
know that it was not what they could
talk about so there sort of a
conversation they'd have with me. Yeah.
And, you know, not not inside not inside
the company. And so, I think I think the
I think the the delta between what
people said behind closed doors and what
they thought they could say in public
was extremely big. I I guess this is
always a problem with these, you know,
speech codes, these these uh
restrictions on free speech is that they
eventually backfire very badly on the
left, which is pushing them because um
at some point it it sets up this thing
where people don't flip at the margins.
At some point sets up this thing where
they flip radically. At some point, you
know, it only takes, you know, one
little child to say the emperor has no
clothes and you get a cascade. That's
right. What's scary about Wilk AI as
well, I guess, the same way. You don't
want to make too many rules to try to
protect it from saying things because
all of a sudden it could could go the
other way. It's interesting, but but
well, yeah, there's other reasons you
want to do that too, but but I I think I
think something like this is what
happened. It was, you know, I I think
there's sort of this the setup for um I
think it's the teamwork Quran,
public private truths, public lies. It's
a sort of economics theory of when you
have a revolution and it's it's when
everybody is lying and everybody knows
that everybody's lying. Then you and
then you can get this at some point you
can get this very very fast preference
cascade and something like this happened
in in Silicon Valley in the last few
years. There was a there was a buildup
that took a few years for people to
realize that you know things were very
different and then eventually they
realized that everybody realized it and
then then then it can break. pro
probably this is by the way also the the
more the hopeful thing on on Doge where
the pessimistic view is man you know the
government always grows and no
departments ever get shut down and
nothing ever changes. I think Milton
Friedman's line on it was you know
there's not a single government program
that's ever gotten defunded once it gets
started. So it's it's always just a
one-way racket. Um but then you know in
2019 maybe people like the two of us had
our suspicions that the people in
government weren't working very hard but
after five years of remote work and what
we know from our companies is that
remote work is not working and 5 years
of people 90% or whatever of the federal
workforce not working and not making a
difference. you sort of realize that
these people weren't working before and
it doesn't matter and maybe um and maybe
um maybe um you can um replace them with
AI or maybe you can replace them without
AI and just use uh the the AI can be
completely fake and we can improve
things tremendously. Well, that's that's
a very optimistic note from you, Peter,
to end it on. So, thank you very much
for for being here today. All right.
Thanks for having me.