We started Founders Fund 2005. So in
different ways I've been been at this
and I' done some angel investing before
that. But I've been been doing this for
20 plus years. And the area where we've
probably had the least success from a
returns basis in software. The two worst
areas are um are educational software
related companies and healthcare IT
companies. and um and pro like education
we we felt was so hard we we didn't even
uh we did very little healthcare we
tried a few more things but um it's and
and and the the the rough version of
what's gone wrong in the health care
sectors we've done so little in
education I feel I can't even comment on
it but but healthcare what's what's
roughly gone wrong is um you have all
sorts of things that sound like a pretty
good plan for reforming the system and
it's It's this one angle on the pricing
model you need to change. But then there
are 10 different ways you can do it and
it's these complicated uh ways you have
to get the payments to shift from the
insurance companies or the government or
uh the hospitals which are very cluji.
If you can just get consumers or doctors
to change that might be easier but they
they typically are not the people who
pay. And so there sort of are there's
this you know very cluji messed up
system. lots of people try try to do it.
My my sociological model is always that
I'm I'm deeply skeptical of um of
investments where a lot of VCs uh would
go to some silly VC networking event and
uh want to brag about it. And I I I feel
there there's a lot of that with the
healthc care education startups. Um this
is like the green this like the green
tech stuff too. It was too popular. The
green green tech stuff. Yeah. I mean, at
some point it it loses money and then
it's not popular anymore. But but while
it lasts, it's very popular because
there's there's no fast-term
accountability in venture capital. You
know, sometimes you have momentum and
the valuations go up and that that does
give you a feel whether things are
working. But in practice, uh you off,
you know, it's 5 10 years later you get
liquidity on on these businesses or even
longer. it it takes incredibly long and
so people tend to overindex on these
sociological factors and what's what's
popular and that's and so there was
there was a there's a way that uh the
healthc care education sectors even
though they're very broken um people
have these often too conventional ideas
on how to fix them and um and so yeah
it's I know you know another trend where
I' I've tried investing some over over
the last decade is you know is is are
all these marijuana related businesses
and it's like yeah it's obviously like a
big trend um but it's it's an obvious
trend and then it turned out to be
extremely hard to figure out what what
to do with yeah I said some of the think
things that are too popular and too
obvious it's just you have to have a
totally different take on it or it's not
going to work
uh yeah you like if you have an
unpopular take on it that that that
might work so at the time I was we
working I was working for you were
working on the hedge fund. You were
invested in Facebook. You're doing other
investing and we decided to really go
all in and spend a lot of time on
Palunteer. Why why was that the right
choice then as tech but go more
specifically like what what what was
what was your high level around that at
that time? How were you thinking about
it? What what gap were we going after?
It was very broadly uh government then
it was within that it was defense uh
more narrowly it was sort of the the um
intelligence community that sort of adj
you know defense adjacent uh
I you know it was it was a couple of
years after 9/11 we're sort of starting
it in 2003
2004 and uh there were all these ways
that uh I felt that we didn't you know
that we that we these very low tech and
very privacy violating solutions for the
terrorism problem. You know, it was it
was annoying that you had to take off
your shoes at every airport, which was
like just not security, but it was this
incredibly intrusive security theater.
And uh and then yeah, the the question
was could you do something where you'd
have, you know, way more security with
way fewer um you know, technology is
doing more with less. And so the the
terrorism context was could we have more
security against terrorists with less
intrusive um civil liberties violations?
And then um and then and then there was
broadly this question, you know, was was
there some way to to reset all these
things in the government? And uh it was
a black box and you know we did not know
whether places like the CIA and NSA and
places like that had you know some super
duper computer working in the background
that was catching all the terrorists. Um
we sort of suspected they didn't um and
um and then it took it took a while to
figure that out but uh I I think our
suspicions were probably correct. Yeah,
we saw them doing a lot of things that
made us suspect that they actually
gotten way behind Silicon Valley and
there were I mean there were details
that you know it was hard to say you
know with our I remember our first trip
to Langley in uh in 2000 2005 we got
inel to invest and you and I were there
and I think it took us about a day or
two to process but you know was at the
end of the trip it was like do you want
to come do you want to buy some stuff
from the CIA gift gift shop and it was
like you can get a windbreaker and a CIA
cap coins they were kind of cool I think
they were half of them were made in
China which is you know But but um and
then of course there was probably some
you know there's some steelman version
where the the it was just a decoy and
there was really a lot of stuff going on
in the background. But uh do you
remember the doors all had these like
eye detectors on each of the door that
you're supposed to scan your eye to get
in but none of them worked. So there so
wherever you go around there'd be like
the eye detector but they were broken.
they turn them all off which I thought
was kind of like a kind of a typical I
don't know you know there were yeah
there all these all all all these play
and so in that context you you you'd
think okay there's there's some very big
problem that can be can be solved it you
know in some ways it turned out to be
more difficult than uh than one would
have thought uh you know there obviously
are all these pro all these sectors
where you have that are very very broken
where um you know education healthare
all all these sort of deeply broken
sectors where the solution
um you know there's some obvious
solutions and the fact they have not
been implemented tells you there's some
big barriers to they're set up not to
allow you to break them. This is kind of
what I think of the palanteer version
is, you know, there was uh there was
this uh I forget what the acronym stands
for. There was this uh software program.
This was once we moved from intelligence
community into the broader military
called DIYs, which was just sort of this
um in theory was a system we were
supposed to figure out ways to integrate
the data across all these uh units in
the field and headquarters and you know
integrate what was going on which is
incredibly important thing to do. In
practice, uh, it was a sort of a cluji
consultant billion-dollar boondoggle
that didn't work. And, uh, and we
naturally thought we would replace it in
in 6 months. And it took it took
something like 10 years. We finally
replaced it in in 2019. And, you know,
we had to sue the army, which and, you
know, we had all our all our consultants
quit and said, you know, um, this is
just the most ridiculous thing. You'll
never get a you can't sue your customer.
And, um, you definitely can't sue the
army. And uh not only will you not get
them as a customer, you will not get
anybody else in DC. You'll just be black
ballalled by everybody. And then but
then you know um and it was under we we
it was in 2016 that we sued them. was
under a 1994 law where um you know the
military was supposed to have an open
procurement process and then when you uh
and then what you can do when you sue
somebody is you you get discovery and
you discover and you sort of discover
what's going on in the sausage making
factory that no one's investigated for
22 years and there's a lot of stuff and
there were sort of you know there there
were internal reports that Palanteer
worked better which didn't matter
because obviously nobody can assess the
software but then more scandalously
there were um you know there were um
orders to suppress the reports. There
were emails that people had to hide the
findings and there was a cover up and
this this did did not sound like the
open procurement process and uh and then
you know and you you won at the court
level then you won at the district at
the DC circuit level and uh you know you
were forced to they were forced to
reopen the process and then you know
after after a decade we we sort of got
the contract. So yeah, so there was
something that was doable, but it was it
was not as straightforward as it as it
sounded. It feels like there's these and
SpaceX had to sue as well, of course. It
feels like there's these parts of our
society that are set up to just maintain
their broken nature, and you have to
just punch really, really, really hard
through them. And it's very rare people
do that, you know. Yeah. SpaceX was the
first successful template to do it. Uh
and and there's, you know, there's
obviously something like this.
you know, the university system seems as
broken or or more than the military
procurement process and then especially
with the, you know, crediting agencies
and all these things where where they
where they just uh are designed to to
prevent newcomers and the it's it's like
if you actually had a newcomer, they
would just eat the field. They try to
crush you. They try to crush you. It
took us thousands of pages of
regulation. But I think there was an
Elon metaphor he told me once and this
is like I I don't remember when this was
like maybe 2010 2011 and it was it was
it was sort of like uh there were there
were these three or four aerospace
companies in the US that were like
really badly managed and badly run and
it was sort of they were these very fat
cows on this grassy enclosed field and
if you ever got in there there was just
going to be a blood bath. Oh yeah. So,
it's kind of it's like he's like this
this this carnivore and there's a big
fence and you got to climb this really
big fence. Eventually, you got in there.